So as we have seen,
everything up to this point.
[LAUGH] We have not even discussed a
syntax for type annotations because yeah,
Hindley-Milner, it's decidable,
it's great.
You don't need to annotate your types if
you don't want to but now we're going to.
There are multiple reasons you
might want to annotate your types.
The most obvious one is that these
can serve as essentially comments,
except that they are verified.
So if your comments, you write a comment
over that says, hey, this is a string, but
then later on, it stops being a string.
Nobody tells you about
the comment being out of date,
you just are unpleasantly
surprised perhaps.
Whereas this thing, if I actually were
to change this to not be a string,
then I would get a type mismatch.
So that's a convenient thing,
that type annotations can do.
A subtler thing, that type annotations
this can do is that, although it is
the case that in Hindley-Milner, well
actually we'll talk about that in a sec,
so I'll come back to that one in a sec.
There was another thing that you
can do with type annotations and
we'll come back to it.
So yeah, here are two different type
annotations, string and number.
We're not gonna get into syntax
too much of type annotations,
basically just kind of TypeScript.
Like I said, they're really
an afterthought in this course,
the main purpose is,
let's talk about the type inference.
And then annotations are just a by the
way, this is a thing you probably want to.
So go through and do our usual
assignments of these things, okay,
all this very familiar.
The thing that the type annotation gives
us is that we can basically say, okay,
I can go ahead and actually put
an additional constraint here.
Now we don't actually, at least in
the case of something like string,
we don't need to go and
make a separate type idfor it,
because it's really only
doing one thing in one place.
So much like with our lookups, we can just
say, okay, this is just a constraint, so
we're just gonna unify, we're gonna do
an extra unification here with string,
but we don't need to store it.
Because nobody's ever gonna be like,
hey, I have the same type as that thing's
type annotation, that's just not a thing.
So all we're gonna do is we're
just going to be like, okay,
I see this annotation, got it.
I'm just gonna add one more unification
on the pile and basically say, okay,
because this thing has the type string,
I'm gonna unify 0 with string, and
then that's it, we're done.
We just have that one
unification in the mix, and
then the type annotation is
essentially discarded at that point.
Same thing with numbers, just like,
yeah, just unify this thing with number.
One way that you can think about it is
that the purpose of a type annotation is
essentially to just be an extra
constraint or an extra unification.
And we're gonna come back to that
word constraint in a second.
So this does,
it is a meaningful constraint, right?
So if I did try to annotate
it as a number, and
then I tried to put a string here,
well, that's end up being a string.
And then I unified the string with
a number, then we get a type mismatch.
So the way that you get type
mismatches out of type annotations in
a Hindley-Milner language is basically
just the same way you get type mismatches
absolutely anywhere else.
You just unified two things and
they were both concrete types and
they were different concrete types,
and that's a type mismatch, so
this is exactly how you would do that.
Okay, now there's actually a more precise
way to talk about what Hindley-Milner
gives you, which is that it is not
only decidable type inference, but
it is principle decidable type inference.
Now, not all Hindley-Milner languages
have this, so there are certain type
system features, which, if you put
them in your type system, you stop.
You're still decidable, but
you're not principle decidable, so
I'll explain what that means in a second.
But as an example, so
if you have rank one types,
definitely not gonna get
into what rank types are.
But if you're familiar with Haskell,
there's some extensions called rank two
types and Rank-N types, and
the default being rank one types.
A really subtle distinction here
is that if you have Rank-2 types,
that means you are principle
decidable in Haskell.
If you have Rank-N types, you lose
the principle part but weirdly, and
this is such a strange thing because this
so rarely happens in computer science,
rank two types are still
technically principle decidable.
Rank-1 and Rank-2 both are, bur rank
anything three and above stops being that.
I don't know enough type
theory to know why that is,
I just know that it's that way.
Based on this, I looked into, hey,
could we have ranked two types in rock and
not sacrifice principle
decidable type inference.
And I got two pieces of advice on this,
one was from a professor at Upenn,
Stephanie Weyrich,
who was basically like don't do that.
[LAUGH] She went down the Rank-2 rabbit
hole and was like, no, it's not worth it.
Just either keep your principal
decidable or go all the way to Rank-N,
just that middle ground
is not worth the effort.
And then the other was we were actually
looking into it with rocks like Cogen.
It turns out that there are some type
system features that actually interact
with and restrict.
What you're able to do in terms of high
performance code generation if you're
going straight to machine code or
web assembly like we are here.
So for both of those reasons, yeah,
Rank-2 types, maybe not the best choice.
I mainly give that as an example of there
are good reasons that a language might
choose to sacrifice this.
It's not like if you don't have
the principle part of the type inference,
you're just making a mistake but
just talk about what that is very briefly.
So decidable, like we mentioned earlier,
at the very beginning when we introduced
Hindley-Milner type inference,
this means that the type system
always infers the correct type okay.
Unless there's a bug in the type checker,
which we would never write bugs.
But if some other person were to write
a bug in a type checker, then yeah,
the idea is that the algorithm itself
always produces the correct type.
So assuming the algorithm is implemented
correctly, that's gonna happen and
it never needs help from type annotations.
So we've definitely seen that, haven't
written any type annotations yet, and
we're at the very end of
the type checking section.
Principle decidable type
parameters means that the type
inference always infers the most generic
type, the most flexible possible type.
And the practical upshot of this, it means
that it is not possible in the language to
add a type annotation,
which makes that type more flexible.
But you can add a type annotation that
makes the type less flexible if you want.
So an example of this is you could have an
array that's basically like I am an array
with like an unbound type variable.
Really easy example of this is empty
array, that's unbound type variable.
Empty array is not an array of strings,
it's not an array of numbers,
it's an array of unbound type variable
I don't know it works with anything.
But if you want,
you could say X equals empty array and
slap a type annotation on there that
says X colon array bracket string.
So you're like this is
an empty array of strings,
okay and if you want, you can do that.
And the reason that that sort of
just works naturally is because,
as we've seen from the previous section,
all these things are doing is it's
just unifying whatever the annotation
says with whatever this type is.
So you can of course,
use that to constrain something,
because that's just one of
the things that unification can do.
If it is going down and traversing down
and trying to combine these things and
find some common ground there,
it might say, okay, well,
array of string unifies with
array of unbound type variable.
Well, we descend down and unify string,
which is a concrete type with unbound type
variable, which is null and
string sort of wins.
And this the null gets similar to that,
or just outright replaced, either way,
you end up with array bracket
string if you unify those two.
So even though the type inference says,
yeah, this could be this flexible, you
can annotate it to make it less flexible.
But principal decidable type inference
means that you cannot annotate your
way into it being more flexible
than what it would be.
If you can,
then it's not principal anymore, yeah.
>> Student: I had a question to
go back to the previous slide.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Student: Why is it that,
for example, id0 and
2 are referring to the IDs of
the other elements in the table,
as opposed to just the concrete
type string, for example,
since you're doing unified zero and
string here?
>> Richard Feldman: I see we're saying,
why is this not overriding that one?
>> Student: Yeah.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, I mean that's,
I think that's just a typo on my,
like these, they're similar to
each other so it doesn't matter.
But you're right,
they should be swapped but
you'll end up with the type checker
doing the same things but yeah,
I think you're right,
that's just a slight mistake.
[LAUGH]
>> Student: No worries,
yes I'm not sure it was in a specific,
you know what I mean?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah,
you weren't missing anything but
yeah six one half dozen, the other,
yes it should have been the other slot.
[LAUGH] Good catch.
Okay, so the other thing about
Hindley-Milner is that is a sound type
system, we talked about
this earlier as well.
So basically this means that this type
system has no concept of runtime type
mismatches.
So now that we're at the end
of the type checking section,
we can once again see this.
There was no point at which we were like,
and
here's the spot where you can have
a string here and a number here, and
then if you got the wrong one at runtime,
we crash.
It's like, no if you ever had a string
here and a number here, potentially,
that's where we have a type mismatch, and
we report it to the user at build time.
That's the only thing we even have
a concept of in this type system,
so all type errors, I should say,
are reported at build time.
Also the implication of both of these
is that all types are fully known
at build time.
So even if we know that the type is
a bound, that basically means what we
know about this type is it
could be anything at run time.
It's the identity function like,
one of those type scenarios
are in an empty array.
Yeah, the information about its type
is that that type is maximally flexible
because you can use it with whatever,
it's polymorphic.
Yeah, so in summary, basically,
we talked about polymorphic functions,
arrays and
how they can be polymorphic as well.
And finally, type annotations, at long
last, we actually finally got some type
annotations in here,
right at the last minute, under the wire.
And yeah, that's because,
with him, lemon type that prints,
you don't have to have them,
they're completely optional, yeah.
Would it be fair to say that committing
in ways to Hindley-Milner and
the conventions of it helps us with
polymorphism because it sets a more
strict bound early, it defines our
possibilities upstream, so to speak?
I'd say it's pretty subjective,
the question of does committing to
Hindley-Milner make your life
easier in terms of polymorphism?
Because you're sort of committing to a
certain rule set that's pretty simple, but
also pretty powerful.
Yeah, reasonable people can disagree,
I would say some people would say yeah,
I totally agree, it's great,
it's simple, it's awesome.
Other people might say,
but the type of polymorphism I wanna
do is not easy to do in this system.
I wanna do subtype polymorphisms and
stuff like that, so yeah,
I wouldn't take a stand
either way on that.
[LAUGH] Personally.